---
comments: true
date: 2012-10-21 23:11:03
layout: post
slug: becoming-better-means-facing-your-fears
title: Becoming Better Means Facing Your Fears
wordpress_id: 1766
---

We did an interesting exercise  the other day at Hacker School.  We sat in a group and wrote down all the things that scare us about programming.  The list ended up being something like 50 items long.  For a bunch of really smart and relatively successful programmers, we are steeped in fear.  And it's that fear that keeps us from getting better, rather than a lack of intelligence.  It's fear that keeps us from reaching just about any goal or realizing any potential within us.  It amazes me that despite facing my fears day in and day out for the past 18 months of this programming journey, I still find myself avoiding things that scare me.  <!--more-->When things don't make sense, rather than slowing down and attacking the fuzziness, I skip ahead so I don't have to confront that which challenges me.  Yes of course I get it, I just don't want to write any sample code to verify that I get it because that might irrefutably prove that I DONT FUCKING GET IT.  How many hours, weeks, months have been wasted because I didn't buckle down and attack the things that were fuzzy.  I have forced myself to always come back to things that I don't understand, but have often taken huge breaks in between swings at those problems because facing those demons is more uncomfortable than just about any other thing I could do in any given day.  And yet leaning into the pain and fear is where all the value is.  It's how we become better programmers.  It's how we become better at anything in life.  I've watched friends do everything but the one thing that would get them to their stated goal.  Just pick up the phone and call her already...And yet despite the myriad of demons I've confronted over the last 10 years, there's still that Lizard brain telling me that I can't do it.  That I'm stupid, and not smart enough to be doing this.  That one of these days someone is going to pull back the curtain and reveal the scared little boy who has been pretending to be something he's not.  And THEN I'll be sorry.  Therein lies the value of hacker school.  They've created an environment where the stated goal is to pull the curtain back, and to let the sun shine on our hideous naked bodies.  We can celebrate the fact that we don't know, and then get to the knowing.  We can all be at that point freshman year of college where no one knew anyone and we all were scared little kids and confront these demons together.  If Hacker School's value was only that, it would be worth it.  Hacker School's value far exceeds just that though.  They have created an environment that's no only safe to learn, but where learning flourishes.  One thing that is beaten into us is focus.  Work on one thing until you understand it, and don't stop until you understand it.  And while you're trying to understand it, make sure you know what it is you are trying to understand, and that what you are doing to understand it is a good way to get that understanding.  Focus on one thing, and push through the fuzziness until you get to clarity.

Most people tend to attribute positive things about themselves to internal characteristics, and negative things to environmental or circumstantial factors.  They then reverse it when looking at other people.  I think the reality is that environmental factors play a significantly larger role than any of us would like to imagine (great speech by Michael Lewis on this topic http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CiQ_T5C3hIM).  Why most of us are where we are today be it "successful" or not is largely a result of the environments we've been placed in.  I did well in school because my parents expected that I would do well in school and would make my life a living hell if that did not happen.  Had I been left to my own devices I would have optimized my life for the short term (probably a week to week calculus when you're younger) rather than a long term that at least pointed towards college.  It's pretty incredible to sit here at 29 and look back at how stupid I was at 18, or 16, or 14.  At this point in my life, I feel like I've started to figure things out, which scares me a little bit because when I look back at the times in my life where I thought I had it figured out, it was when I was stupidest.  Donald Rumsfeld famously said, "there are known knowns, known unknowns and unknown unknowns".  When you're young, that graph probably looks like 98% unknown unknowns.  You can't even conceive of how monumentally stupid you really are.  As you start to get a little bit of knowledge, you start to feel like you've got it figured out, hence the expression "a little knowledge is a dangerous thing".  I feel immeasurably lucky to have made it this far in life without monumentally fucking my life up.  Thank god for parents who forced me to do shit I didn't want to do until I reached a point where I could figure that out on my own with a much lower risk.  I wish there was a way for young people to go out and explore the world BEFORE they waste so much money on college.  You have such little idea about the world before you start to work it is almost impossible to derive any value from the things laid at your feet at such a young age (and by that I mean us privileged kids).

_It's_ a great _thing when you realize you still have the ability to surprise yourself_

-Lester in American Beauty

That said, It's never too late to change your life.  Education is wasted on the young, but once you start to grow up, you start to get a sense of how you might want to spend your life.  For many people this comes after hundreds of thousands of dollars have been wasted on their education.  They feel trapped, like it's too late to change.  It's not too late to change.  It's never too late to change.  I started this journey at 27 and am now 29 years old.  Ancient in programming years, and I have far to go to reach the promised land.  Every step of the journey has been tough, and yet there's never been a more rewarding time in my life.
