---
comments: true
date: 2012-01-02 10:20:22
layout: post
slug: crush-it
title: Crush It
wordpress_id: 1743
---

2012 is the first year I feel like I am ready to jump into with both feet. To steal Brett Martin's word, I've never felt more ready to crush it. 2011 was the year I finally taught myself how to program, and to quote Hilary Mason of Bitly, "teaching someone to program is like giving them superpowers". I've never felt so empowered. I go to sleep every day feeling like I used to when I was a kid the night before Christmas, barely able to contain my excitement for the day awaiting me. The world seems filled with limitless possibilities. However, I want to take some time and reflect on how I got to where I am today.
<!--more-->
I'll never forget my senior winter at Dartmouth. Russ, Griffin and Darnell were all living in NYC ostensibly living the life that everyone dreams of. Griffin was interning at some bulge bracket bank I think doing ibanking, and Russ and Darnell were working at some generic corporate law firm. They were making lots of money, and enjoying all that the best city in the world had to offer. And yet when I talked to them about it, they didn't seem very happy. In fact almost no one I knew who lived in NYC post Dartmouth seemed happy. Plenty of people had "great jobs" in finance and all the other industries we are programmed to aspire to from birth. Why didn't anyone like their jobs? We were the best and the brightest, and could have any jobs we wanted, and this was the best the world had to offer...I couldn't help thinking, is this it?

It's been really surprising to me to see where people have ended up 5 years out of college. I'm amazed how large a role luck/inertia have on peoples lives. We do what we've been programmed to do. People don't seem to make many active choices. Dartmouth kids see their peers go into consulting, banking, law and medicine. Recruiters come to Dartmouth from certain industries, and so those industries become filled with Dartmouth students. After about 5 years of working, everyone starts going back to school to further delay making any choices in their life. They can spend two years in business school and then go work for whomever it is that recruits them without having to do any thinking for themselves.

One of the things that's been important to me, is choosing my life. Even if I make the wrong, or imperfect choice, I want it to be my own. I couldn't do the corporate recruiting thing and then go work for whomever picked me. I had to choose for myself. After graduating from Dartmouth, for the first time in my life, I had complete latitude to do anything I wanted. I'd always dreamed of moving to a beautiful place close to the beach where it was Summer year round. After spending a Summer saving up some money working for DDS, I bought a one way ticket to Hawaii with no job, place to live or any friends. It was the most exhilarating thing I'd ever done, and I couldn't wait to start my life.

Hawaii was an amazing experience, filled with challenges, setbacks and many successes. I spent months working horrible temp jobs. That taught me some humility. I also had the experience of starting from the bottom at a large corporation and working my way up. You get a very different perspective when you're in the trenches with "the common man" (I hope that doesn't sound too arrogant). After spending a few months entering telecom orders manually, I became the SME on our billing system and the only one in a corporation of multiple thousand people who had any idea how the IT systems we relied on worked. I began to speak Kenan, CRM, TIBCO and telecom fluenty and became the lead product developer (on the billing side) working alongside the consultants at Bearing Point and Accenture. By the time left, I had worked on teams filled with people at the Director level and above, hired a team of 10 people to work for me, and had my first terrible experience of firing people that didn't work out. At some point, Hawaii felt like it was stifling my growth, and I left for greener pastures in NYC.

I was incredibly lucky to get hired by Byron and Jeb at Proto software which was one of the best experiences of my life. Proto infected me with both the startup and programming bugs. Luckily I had picked up SQL at Hawaiian Telcom, and at Proto I mastered Excel, the basic concepts of programming and application/software development. I was also lucky enough to meet the Abadi's which turned into a 2 year freelance consulting gig which allowed me the freedom to take an almost year long world trip.

I'm amazed that at 26 I had the wherewithall to negotiate an arrangement that allowed me the freedom to do all the things I had dreamed of doing my whole life. Over the course of a year I visited almost every "great" city of the world, and touched every continent except Africa and Antartica. It's hard to believe what I've achieved since I left the "tiny" town of West Hartford almost 10 years ago. It's even harder to believe that I've done so with so many nagging insecurities.
